It is not noon--the Sunbow's raysstill arch
 The torrent with the many hues of heaven,
 And roll the sheeted silver's waving column
 O'er the crag's headlong perpendicular,
 And fling its lines of foaming light along,
 And to and fro, like the pale courser's tail,
 The Giant steed, to be bestrode by Death,
 As told in the Apocalypse.No eyes
 But mine now drink this sight of loveliness;
 I should be sole in this sweet solitude, 10
 And with the Spirit of the place divide
 The homage of these waters.--I will call her.

 Which of itself shows immortality,
 I read that thou wilt pardon to a Son
 Of Earth, whom the abstruser powers permit
 At times to commune with them--if that he 30
 Avail him of his spells--to call thee thus,
 And gaze on thee a moment.

 _Witch_. Son of Earth!
 I know thee, and the Powers which give thee power!
 I know thee for a man of many thoughts,
 And deeds of good and ill, extreme in both,
 Fatal and fated in thy sufferings.
 I have expected this--what would'st thou with me?

 _Man_. To look upon thy beauty--nothing further.
 The face of the earth hath maddened me, and I
 Take refuge in her mysteries, and pierce 40
 To the abodes of those who govern her--
 But they can nothing aid me. I have sought
 From them what they could not bestow, and now
 I search no further.

 _Witch_. What could be the quest
 Which is not in the power of the most powerful,
 The rulers of the invisible?

 _Man_. A boon;--
 But why should I repeat it? 'twere in vain.

 _Witch_. I know not that; let thy lips utter it.

 _Man_. Well, though it torture me, 'tis but the same;
 My pang shall find a voice. From my youth upwards 50
 My Spirit walked not with the souls of men,
 Nor looked upon the earth with human eyes;
 The thirst of their ambition was not mine,
 The aim of their existence was not mine;
 My joys--my griefs--my passions--and my powers,
 Made me a stranger; though I wore the form,
 I had no sympathy with breathing flesh,
 Nor midst the Creatures of Clay that girded me
 Was there but One who--but of her anon.
 I said with men, and with the thoughts of men, 60
 I held but slight communion; but instead,
 My joy was in the wilderness,--to breathe
 The difficult air of the iced mountain's top,Where the birds dare not build--nor insect's wing
 Flit o'er the herbless granite; or to plunge
 Into the torrent, and to roll along
 On the swift whirl of the new-breaking wave
 Of river-stream, or Ocean, in their flow.In these my early strength exulted; or
 To follow through the night the moving moon,70
 The stars and their development; or catch
 The dazzling lightnings till my eyes grew dim;
 Or to look, list'ning, on the scattered leaves,
 While Autumn winds were at their evening song.
 These were my pastimes, and to be alone;
 For if the beings, of whom I was one,--
 Hating to be so,--crossed me in my path,
 I felt myself degraded back to them,
 And was all clay again. And then I dived,
 In my lone wanderings, to the caves of Death, 80
 Searching its cause in its effect; and drew
 From withered bones, and skulls, and heaped up dust
 Conclusions most forbidden.Then I passed--
 The nights of years in sciences untaught,
 Save in the old-time; and with time and toil,
 And terrible ordeal, and such penance
 As in itself hath power upon the air,
 And spirits that do compass air and earth,
 Space, and the peopled Infinite, I made
 Mine eyes familiar with Eternity, 90
 Such as, before me, did the Magi, and
 He who from out their fountain-dwellings raised
 Eros and Anteros,at Gadara,
 As I do thee;--and with my knowledge grew
 The thirst of knowledge, and the power and joy
 Of this most bright intelligence, until----

 _Witch_. Proceed.

 _Man_. Oh! I but thus prolonged my words,
 Boasting these idle attributes, because
 As I approach the core of my heart's grief--
 But--to my task. I have not named to thee 100
 Father or mother, mistress, friend, or being,
 With whom I wore the chain of human ties;
 If I had such, they seemed not such to me--
 Yet there was One----

 _Witch_. Spare not thyself--proceed.

 _Man_. She was like me in lineaments--her eyes--
 Her hair--her features--all, to the very tone
 Even of her voice, they said were like to mine;
 But softened all, and tempered into beauty:
 She had the same lone thoughts and wanderings,
 The quest of hidden knowledge, and a mind 110
 To comprehend the Universe: nor these
 Alone, but with them gentler powers than mine,
 Pity, and smiles, and tears--which I had not;
 And tenderness--but that I had for her;
 Humility--and that I never had.
 Her faults were mine--her virtues were her own--
 I loved her, and destroyed her!

 _Witch_. With thy hand?

 _Man_. Not with my hand, but heart, which broke her heart;
 It gazed on mine, and withered. I have shed
 Blood, but not hers--and yet her blood was shed; 120
 I saw--and could not stanch it.

 _Witch_. And for this--
 A being of the race thou dost despise--
 The order, which thine own would rise above,
 Mingling with us and ours,--thou dost forego
 The gifts of our great knowledge, and shrink'st back
 To recreant mortality----Away!

 _Man_. Daughter of Air! I tell thee, since that hour--
 But words are breath--look on me in my sleep,
 Or watch my watchings--Come and sit by me!
 My solitude is solitude no more, 130
 But peopled with the Furies;--I have gnashed
 My teeth in darkness till returning morn,
 Then cursed myself till sunset;--I have prayed
 For madness as a blessing--'tis denied me.
 I have affronted Death--but in the war
 Of elements the waters shrunk from me,And fatal things passed harmless; the cold hand
 Of an all-pitiless Demon held me back,
 Back by a single hair, which would not break.
 In Fantasy, Imagination, all 140
 The affluence of my soul--which one day was
 A Croesus in creation--I plunged deep,
 But, like an ebbing wave, it dashed me back
 Into the gulf of my unfathomed thought.
 I plunged amidst Mankind--ForgetfulnessI sought in all, save where 'tis to be found--
 And that I have to learn--my Sciences,
 My long pursued and superhuman art,
 Is mortal here: I dwell in my despair--
 And live--and live for ever._Witch_. It may be 150
 That I can aid thee.

 _Man_. To do this thy power
 Must wake the dead, or lay me low with them.
 Do so--in any shape--in any hour--
 With any torture--so it be the last.

 _Witch_. That is not in my province; but if thou
 Wilt swear obedience to my will, and do
 My bidding, it may help thee to thy wishes.

 _Man_. I will not swear--Obey! and whom? the Spirits
 Whose presence I command, and be the slave
 Of those who served me--Never!

 _Witch_. Is this all? 160
 Hast thou no gentler answer?--Yet bethink thee,
 And pause ere thou rejectest.

 _Man_. I have said it.

 _Witch_. Enough! I may retire then--say!

 _Man_. Retire!

 _Man_. (_alone_). We are the fools of Time and Terror: Days
 Steal on us, and steal from us; yet we live,
 Loathing our life, and dreading still to die.
 In all the days of this detested yoke--
 This vital weight upon the struggling heart,
 Which sinks with sorrow, or beats quick with pain,
 Or joy that ends in agony or faintness-- 170
 In all the days of past and future--for
 In life there is no present--we can number
 How few--how less than few--wherein the soul
 Forbears to pant for death, and yet draws back
 As from a stream in winter, though the chillBe but a moment's. I have one resource
 Still in my science--I can call the dead,
 And ask them what it is we dread to be:
 The sternest answer can but be the Grave,
 And that is nothing: if they answer not-- 180
 The buried Prophet answered to the Hag
 Of Endor; and the Spartan Monarch drew
 From the Byzantine maid's unsleeping spirit
 An answer and his destiny--he slew
 That which he loved, unknowing what he slew,
 And died unpardoned--though he called in aid
 The Phyxian Jove, and in Phigalia roused
 The Arcadian Evocators to compel
 The indignant shadow to depose her wrath,
 Or fix her term of vengeance--she replied 190
 In words of dubious import, but fulfilled.If I had never lived, that which I love
 Had still been living; had I never loved,
 That which I love would still be beautiful,
 Happy and giving happiness. What is she?
 What is she now?--a sufferer for my sins--
 A thing I dare not think upon--or nothing.
 Within few hours I shall not call in vain--
 Yet in this hour I dread the thing I dare:
 Until this hour I never shrunk to gaze 200
 On spirit, good or evil--now I tremble,
 And feel a strange cold thaw upon my heart.
 But I can act even what I most abhor,
 And champion human fears.--The night approaches.