_Man_. The spirits I have raised abandon me,
 The spells which I have studied baffle me,
 The remedy I recked of tortured me
 I lean no more on superhuman aid;
 It hath no power upon the past, and for
 The future, till the past be gulfed in darkness,
 It is not of my search.--My Mother Earth!And thou fresh-breaking Day, and you, ye Mountains,
 Why are ye beautiful? I cannot love ye.
 And thou, the bright Eye of the Universe, 10
 That openest over all, and unto all
 Art a delight--thou shin'st not on my heart.
 And you, ye crags, upon whose extreme edge
 I stand, and on the torrent's brink beneath
 Behold the tall pines dwindled as to shrubs
 In dizziness of distance; when a leap,
 A stir, a motion, even a breath, would bring
 My breast upon its rocky bosom's bed
 To rest for ever--wherefore do I pause?
 I feel the impulse--yet I do not plunge; 20
 I see the peril--yet do not recede;
 And my brain reels--and yet my foot is firm:
 There is a power upon me which withholds,
 And makes it my fatality to live,--
 If it be life to wear within myself
 This barrenness of Spirit, and to be
 My own Soul's sepulchre, for I have ceased
 To justify my deeds unto myself--
 The last infirmity of evil. Aye,
 Thou winged and cloud-cleaving minister, 30
 Whose happy flight is highest into heaven,
 Well may'st thou swoop so near me--I should be
 Thy prey, and gorge thine eaglets; thou art gone
 Where the eye cannot follow thee; but thine
 Yet pierces downward, onward, or above,
 With a pervading vision.--Beautiful!
 How beautiful is all this visible world!How glorious in its action and itself!
 But we, who name ourselves its sovereigns, we,
 Half dust, half deity, alike unfit 40
 To sink or soar, with our mixed essence make
 A conflict of its elements, and breathe
 The breath of degradation and of pride,
 Contending with low wants and lofty will,
 Till our Mortality predominates,
 And men are--what they name not to themselves,
 And trust not to each other. Hark! the note,
 The natural music of the mountain reed--
 For here the patriarchal days are not
 A pastoral fable--pipes in the liberal air, 50
 Mixed with the sweet bells of the sauntering herd;My soul would drink those echoes. Oh, that I were
 The viewless spirit of a lovely sound,
 A living voice, a breathing harmony,
 A bodiless enjoyment--born and dying
 With the blest tone which made me!

 _Enter from below a_ CHAMOIS HUNTER.

 _Chamois Hunter_. Even so
 This way the Chamois leapt: her nimble feet
 Have baffled me; my gains to-day will scarce
 Repay my break-neck travail.--What is here?
 Who seems not of my trade, and yet hath reached 60
 A height which none even of our mountaineers,
 Save our best hunters, may attain: his garb
 Is goodly, his mien manly, and his air
 Proud as a free-born peasant's, at this distance:
 I will approach him nearer.

 _Man_. (_not perceiving the other_). To be thus--
 Grey-haired with anguish, like these blasted pines,
 Wrecks of a single winter, barkless, branchless,A blighted trunk upon a curséd root,
 Which but supplies a feeling to Decay--
 And to be thus, eternally but thus, 70
 Having been otherwise! Now furrowed o'er
 With wrinkles, ploughed by moments, not by years
 And hours, all tortured into ages--hours
 Which I outlive!--Ye toppling crags of ice!
 Ye Avalanches, whom a breath draws down
 In mountainous o'erwhelming, come and crush me!
 I hear ye momently above, beneath,
 Crash with a frequent conflict;but ye pass,
 And only fall on things that still would live;
 On the young flourishing forest, or the hut 80
 And hamlet of the harmless villager.

 _C. Hun_. The mists begin to rise from up the valley;
 I'll warn him to descend, or he may chance
 To lose at once his way and life together.

 _Man_. The mists boil up around the glaciers; clouds
 Rise curling fast beneath me, white and sulphury,
 Like foam from the roused ocean of deep Hell,Whose every wave breaks on a living shore,
 Heaped with the damned like pebbles.--I am giddy._C. Hun_. I must approach him cautiously; if near, 90
 A sudden step will startle him, and he
 Seems tottering already.

 _Man_. Mountains have fallen,
 Leaving a gap in the clouds, and with the shock
 Rocking their Alpine brethren; filling up
 The ripe green valleys with Destruction's splinters;
 Damming the rivers with a sudden dash,
 Which crushed the waters into mist, and made
 Their fountains find another channel--thus,
 Thus, in its old age, did Mount Rosenberg--Why stood I not beneath it?

 _C. Hun_. Friend! have a care, 100
 Your next step may be fatal!--for the love
 Of Him who made you, stand not on that brink!

 _Man_. (_not hearing him_).
 Such would have been for me a fitting tomb;
 My bones had then been quiet in their depth;
 They had not then been strewn upon the rocks
 For the wind's pastime--as thus--thus they shall be--
 In this one plunge.--Farewell, ye opening Heavens!
 Look not upon me thus reproachfully--
 You were not meant for me--Earth! take these atoms!

 _C. Hun_. Hold, madman!--though aweary of thy life, 110
 Stain not our pure vales with thy guilty blood:
 Away with me----I will not quit my hold.

 _Man_. I am most sick at heart--nay, grasp me not--
 I am all feebleness--the mountains whirl
 Spinning around me----I grow blind----What art thou?

 _C. Hun_. I'll answer that anon.--Away with me----
 The clouds grow thicker----there--now lean on me--
 Place your foot here--here, take this staff, and cling
 A moment to that shrub--now give me your hand,
 And hold fast by my girdle--softly--well-- 120
 The Chalet will be gained within an hour:
 Come on, we'll quickly find a surer footing,
 And something like a pathway, which the torrent
 Hath washed since winter.--Come,'tis bravely done--
 You should have been a hunter.--Follow me.