Clear, placid Leman! thy contrasted lake,
 With the wild world I dwelt in, is a thing
 Which warns me, with its stillness, to forsake
 Earth's troubled waters for a purer spring.
 This quiet sail is as a noiseless wing
 To waft me from distraction; once I loved
 Torn ocean's roar, but thy soft murmuring
 Sounds sweet as if a sister's voice reproved,
That I with stern delights should e'er have been so moved.

 It is the hush of night, and all between
 Thy margin and the mountains, dusk, yet clear,
 Mellowed and mingling, yet distinctly seen.
 Save darkened Jura, whose capt heights appear
 Precipitously steep; and drawing near,
 There breathes a living fragrance from the shore,
 Of flowers yet fresh with childhood; on the ear
 Drops the light drip of the suspended oar,
Or chirps the grasshopper one good-night carol more;

 He is an evening reveller, who makes
 His life an infancy, and sings his fill;
 At intervals, some bird from out the brakes
 Starts into voice a moment, then is still.
 There seems a floating whisper on the hill,
 But that is fancy, for the starlight dews
 All silently their tears of love instil,
 Weeping themselves away, till they infuse
Deep into Nature's breast the spirit of her hues.

 Ye stars! which are the poetry of heaven,
 If in your bright leaves we would read the fate
 Of men and empires,--'tis to be forgiven,
 That in our aspirations to be great,
 Our destinies o'erleap their mortal state,
 And claim a kindred with you; for ye are
 A beauty and a mystery, and create
 In us such love and reverence from afar,
That fortune, fame, power, life, have named themselves a star.

 All heaven and earth are still--though not in sleep,
 But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
 And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep: --
 All heaven and earth are still: from the high host
 Of stars, to the lulled lake and mountain-coast,
 All is concentered in a life intense,
 Where not a beam, nor air, nor leaf is lost,
 But hath a part of being, and a sense
Of that which is of all Creator and defence.

 Then stirs the feeling infinite, so felt
 In solitude, where we are LEAST alone;
 A truth, which through our being then doth melt,
 And purifies from self: it is a tone,
 The soul and source of music, which makes known
 Eternal harmony, and sheds a charm,
 Like to the fabled Cytherea's zone,
 Binding all things with beauty;--'twould disarm
The spectre Death, had he substantial power to harm.

 Nor vainly did the early Persian make
 His altar the high places and the peak
 Of earth-o'ergazing mountains, and thus take
 A fit and unwalled temple, there to seek
 The Spirit, in whose honour shrines are weak,
 Upreared of human hands. Come, and compare
 Columns and idol-dwellings, Goth or Greek,
 With Nature's realms of worship, earth and air,
Nor fix on fond abodes to circumscribe thy prayer!

 The sky is changed!--and such a change! O night,
 And storm, and darkness, ye are wondrous strong,
 Yet lovely in your strength, as is the light
 Of a dark eye in woman! Far along,
 From peak to peak, the rattling crags among,
 Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
 But every mountain now hath found a tongue;
 And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,
Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud!

 And this is in the night:--Most glorious night!
 Thou wert not sent for slumber! let me be
 A sharer in thy fierce and far delight--
 A portion of the tempest and of thee!
 How the lit lake shines, a phosphoric sea,
 And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!
 And now again 'tis black,--and now, the glee
 Of the loud hills shakes with its mountain-mirth,
As if they did rejoice o'er a young earthquake's birth.

 Now, where the swift Rhone cleaves his way between
 Heights which appear as lovers who have parted
 In hate, whose mining depths so intervene,
 That they can meet no more, though broken-hearted;
 Though in their souls, which thus each other thwarted,
 Love was the very root of the fond rage
 Which blighted their life's bloom, and then departed:
 Itself expired, but leaving them an age
Of years all winters--war within themselves to wage.

 Now, where the quick Rhone thus hath cleft his way,
 The mightiest of the storms hath ta'en his stand;
 For here, not one, but many, make their play,
 And fling their thunderbolts from hand to hand,
 Flashing and cast around: of all the band,
 The brightest through these parted hills hath forked
 His lightnings, as if he did understand
 That in such gaps as desolation worked,
There the hot shaft should blast whatever therein lurked.

 Sky, mountains, river, winds, lake, lightnings! ye,
 With night, and clouds, and thunder, and a soul
 To make these felt and feeling, well may be
 Things that have made me watchful; the far roll
 Of your departing voices, is the knoll
 Of what in me is sleepless,--if I rest.
 But where of ye, O tempests! is the goal?
 Are ye like those within the human breast?
Or do ye find at length, like eagles, some high nest?

 Could I embody and unbosom now
 That which is most within me,--could I wreak
 My thoughts upon expression, and thus throw
 Soul, heart, mind, passions, feelings, strong or weak,
 All that I would have sought, and all I seek,
 Bear, know, feel, and yet breathe--into one word,
 And that one word were lightning, I would speak;
 But as it is, I live and die unheard,
With a most voiceless thought, sheathing it as a sword.

 The morn is up again, the dewy morn,
 With breath all incense, and with cheek all bloom,
 Laughing the clouds away with playful scorn,
 And living as if earth contained no tomb,--
 And glowing into day: we may resume
 The march of our existence: and thus I,
 Still on thy shores, fair Leman! may find room
 And food for meditation, nor pass by
Much, that may give us pause, if pondered fittingly.

 Clarens! sweet Clarens! birthplace of deep Love!
 Thine air is the young breath of passionate thought;
 Thy trees take root in love; the snows above
 The very glaciers have his colours caught,
 And sunset into rose-hues sees them wrought
 By rays which sleep there lovingly: the rocks,
 The permanent crags, tell here of Love, who sought
 In them a refuge from the worldly shocks,
Which stir and sting the soul with hope that woos, then mocks.

 Clarens! by heavenly feet thy paths are trod,--
 Undying Love's, who here ascends a throne
 To which the steps are mountains; where the god
 Is a pervading life and light,--so shown
 Not on those summits solely, nor alone
 In the still cave and forest; o'er the flower
 His eye is sparkling, and his breath hath blown,
 His soft and summer breath, whose tender power
Passes the strength of storms in their most desolate hour.

 All things are here of HIM; from the black pines,
 Which are his shade on high, and the loud roar
 Of torrents, where he listeneth, to the vines
 Which slope his green path downward to the shore,
 Where the bowed waters meet him, and adore,
 Kissing his feet with murmurs; and the wood,
 The covert of old trees, with trunks all hoar,
 But light leaves, young as joy, stands where it stood,
Offering to him, and his, a populous solitude.

 A populous solitude of bees and birds,
 And fairy-formed and many coloured things,
 Who worship him with notes more sweet than words,
 And innocently open their glad wings,
 Fearless and full of life: the gush of springs,
 And fall of lofty fountains, and the bend
 Of stirring branches, and the bud which brings
 The swiftest thought of beauty, here extend,
Mingling, and made by Love, unto one mighty end.

 He who hath loved not, here would learn that lore,
 And make his heart a spirit: he who knows
 That tender mystery, will love the more,
 For this is Love's recess, where vain men's woes,
 And the world's waste, have driven him far from those,
 For 'tis his nature to advance or die;
 He stands not still, but or decays, or grows
 Into a boundless blessing, which may vie
With the immortal lights, in its eternity!

 'Twas not for fiction chose Rousseau this spot,
 Peopling it with affections; but he found
 It was the scene which passion must allot
 To the mind's purified beings; 'twas the ground
 Where early Love his Psyche's zone unbound,
 And hallowed it with loveliness: 'tis lone,
 And wonderful, and deep, and hath a sound,
 And sense, and sight of sweetness; here the Rhone
Hath spread himself a couch, the Alps have reared a throne.

 Lausanne! and Ferney! ye have been the abodes
 Of names which unto you bequeathed a name;
 Mortals, who sought and found, by dangerous roads,
 A path to perpetuity of fame:
 They were gigantic minds, and their steep aim
 Was, Titan-like, on daring doubts to pile
 Thoughts which should call down thunder, and the flame
 Of Heaven, again assailed, if Heaven the while
On man and man's research could deign do more than smile.

 The one was fire and fickleness, a child
 Most mutable in wishes, but in mind
 A wit as various,--gay, grave, sage, or wild,--
 Historian, bard, philosopher combined:
 He multiplied himself among mankind,
 The Proteus of their talents: But his own
 Breathed most in ridicule,--which, as the wind,
 Blew where it listed, laying all things prone,--
Now to o'erthrow a fool, and now to shake a throne.

 The other, deep and slow, exhausting thought,
 And hiving wisdom with each studious year,
 In meditation dwelt, with learning wrought,
 And shaped his weapon with an edge severe,
 Sapping a solemn creed with solemn sneer;
 The lord of irony,--that master spell,
 Which stung his foes to wrath, which grew from fear,
 And doomed him to the zealot's ready hell,
Which answers to all doubts so eloquently well.

 Yet, peace be with their ashes,--for by them,
 If merited, the penalty is paid;
 It is not ours to judge, far less condemn;
 The hour must come when such things shall be made
 Known unto all,--or hope and dread allayed
 By slumber on one pillow, in the dust,
 Which, thus much we are sure, must lie decayed;
 And when it shall revive, as is our trust,
'Twill be to be forgiven, or suffer what is just.

 But let me quit man's works, again to read
 His Maker's spread around me, and suspend
 This page, which from my reveries I feed,
 Until it seems prolonging without end.
 The clouds above me to the white Alps tend,
 And I must pierce them, and survey whate'er
 May be permitted, as my steps I bend
 To their most great and growing region, where
The earth to her embrace compels the powers of air.

 Italia! too, Italia! looking on thee
 Full flashes on the soul the light of ages,
 Since the fierce Carthaginian almost won thee,
 To the last halo of the chiefs and sages
 Who glorify thy consecrated pages;
 Thou wert the throne and grave of empires; still,
 The fount at which the panting mind assuages
 Her thirst of knowledge, quaffing there her fill,
Flows from the eternal source of Rome's imperial hill.

 Thus far have I proceeded in a theme
 Renewed with no kind auspices:--to feel
 We are not what we have been, and to deem
 We are not what we should be, and to steel
 The heart against itself; and to conceal,
 With a proud caution, love or hate, or aught,--
 Passion or feeling, purpose, grief, or zeal,--
 Which is the tyrant spirit of our thought,
Is a stern task of soul:--No matter,--it is taught.

 And for these words, thus woven into song,
 It may be that they are a harmless wile,--
 The colouring of the scenes which fleet along,
 Which I would seize, in passing, to beguile
 My breast, or that of others, for a while.
 Fame is the thirst of youth,--but I am not
 So young as to regard men's frown or smile
 As loss or guerdon of a glorious lot;
I stood and stand alone,--remembered or forgot.

 I have not loved the world, nor the world me;
 I have not flattered its rank breath, nor bowed
 To its idolatries a patient knee,--
 Nor coined my cheek to smiles, nor cried aloud
 In worship of an echo; in the crowd
 They could not deem me one of such; I stood
 Among them, but not of them; in a shroud
 Of thoughts which were not their thoughts, and still could,
Had I not filed my mind, which thus itself subdued.

 I have not loved the world, nor the world me,--
 But let us part fair foes; I do believe,
 Though I have found them not, that there may be
 Words which are things,--hopes which will not deceive,
 And virtues which are merciful, nor weave
 Snares for the falling: I would also deem
 O'er others' griefs that some sincerely grieve;
 That two, or one, are almost what they seem,--
That goodness is no name, and happiness no dream.

 My daughter! with thy name this song begun--
 My daughter! with thy name this much shall end--
 I see thee not, I hear thee not,--but none
 Can be so wrapt in thee; thou art the friend
 To whom the shadows of far years extend:
 Albeit my brow thou never shouldst behold,
 My voice shall with thy future visions blend,
 And reach into thy heart, when mine is cold,--
A token and a tone, even from thy father's mould.

 To aid thy mind's development,--to watch
 Thy dawn of little joys,--to sit and see
 Almost thy very growth,--to view thee catch
 Knowledge of objects, wonders yet to thee!
 To hold thee lightly on a gentle knee,
 And print on thy soft cheek a parent's kiss,--
 This, it should seem, was not reserved for me
 Yet this was in my nature:--As it is,
I know not what is there, yet something like to this.

 Yet, though dull Hate as duty should be taught,
 I know that thou wilt love me; though my name
 Should be shut from thee, as a spell still fraught
 With desolation, and a broken claim:
 Though the grave closed between us,--'twere the same,
 I know that thou wilt love me: though to drain
 MY blood from out thy being were an aim,
 And an attainment,--all would be in vain,--
Still thou wouldst love me, still that more than life retain.

 The child of love,--though born in bitterness,
 And nurtured in convulsion. Of thy sire
 These were the elements, and thine no less.
 As yet such are around thee; but thy fire
 Shall be more tempered, and thy hope far higher.
 Sweet be thy cradled slumbers! O'er the sea,
 And from the mountains where I now respire,
 Fain would I waft such blessing upon thee,
As, with a sigh, I deem thou mightst have been to me!